In this video we'll see how we can do pass by reference using pointer parameters in C++.
We can use pointers then the dereference operator to achieve pass by reference.
In this case the function parameter is a pointer.
And the actual parameter can be a pointer variable or the address of a variable.
Let's see what this looks like syntactically
here we're declaring a function prototype and then defining the function.
The function is called Double data and it expects a pointer to an integer as a parameter.
Notice it doesn't return anything.
Instead it will double the contents of the data the pointer points to.
So in the body of the function we simply dereference the pointer and multiply the value it points to
by two and assign it right back.
I've written this using a compound assignment statement but I've also written out the long form of the
assignment statement just in case the compound assignment is confusing.
I also chose to multiply by two on purpose.
Since this uses the asterisk as the multiplication operator keep them straight.
Don't let the syntax confuse you.
In one case the asterisk is multiplication and in the other it's indirection or dereference operator
OK.
So how do you call this function.
Let's see that in the next slide we know that since the function parameter is a pointer to an integer
that means it expects the address of an integer.
Well in this case I have an integer named value and it's initialized to 10.
I can call double data with the address of that integer using the ampersand which is the address of
operator.
When I return from the function I now display value which has doubled to 20.
Let's head over to the IEEE and see this and other examples of pass by reference with pointers.
Ok so many ideas you can see that I mean the section 12 workspace in the passing pointers one project
will go over a couple of different projects that do pass by reference using pointers a little bit differently
from one another.
You can see exactly what's happening and I'll walk you through these in detail.
You can see here that we've got the same function that we wrote in the slides right here.
Double data.
It expects a pointer to an integer and all it does is it doubles whatever it's pointing to.
So whatever integer is pointing there was just doubling it.
And here's my main which we're going to run when a run maned couple of different ways.
First this part right here and then the second part right here.
This you will see is use the address of a value and this is using natural pointers to different ways
to pass really the same information in.
OK so let's start running this.
We've got our main and it's activated on the stack right here.
You'll notice Maine has two local variables.
It's got an integer value and it's got an integer pointer so the value is on the stack.
And right now it's initialized to 10 and we also have an 8 pointer which is a pointer to an integer
and right now it's not.
I'll just leave it blank.
Let's say that value is an address 1000 and in pointers that address 2000 just to keep things straight.
OK so that's where we're at.
Now we're here at line 16 output value.
But what's value.
Well we just go to the variable and grab its contents right.
So we're going to display a 10 here just like we have before.
Now we call the function double data and we pass in the address of value.
OK so main stops what it's doing and we transfer control over to this function up here.
So we're going to call double data and we're going to pass in the address of value you can see right
here what's the address of value.
It's a thousand.
So we're going to pass in a thousand to this function.
That thousand will get copied into pointers so that function right here has a local variable called
pointer and you could see that I got right there.
Notice it's the same name as this variable.
That's ok we can use the same name for different variables.
These are two different variables and two different scopes.
OK so we're passing in a thousand to it.
So that's what we're doing.
There's our pointer so now that the pointer is pointing to this value read here at address a thousand.
So what do we do now what we're going to double that value basically.
So let me write this out longhand here.
So Will dereference pointer on the left hand side equals.
Again dereference pointer times too and that's what this compound assignment is doing.
Notice that that Astras right there is multiplication.
These asterisks here that's the dereference operator.
Keep them straight it doesn't matter that dragsters look at the context and it should be pretty clear.
All right so let's execute this dereference int pointer followed the point towards pointing right here.
Got a 10 multiply that by 2 gives me the 20 and we're assigning 20 into wherever and pointer is pointing
in pointer is pointing to a thousand.
So we just change that 10 to 20.
At this point that function is done.
So we're going to clean up the stack.
This activation gets popped off the stack so this is all gone now.
There you go.
Now we're back to Main and we are put to value.
The value is now 20 and we're done with that function call.
OK so now let's keep going.
We're here now.
We're going to output a bunch of lines and then we're setting it pointer to the address of value.
Well it was no before remember we nailed it out right here.
So at this point it now is the address of value what's the address of value it's a thousand.
So it's a thousand.
There's my pointer I'm pointing to value.
So what do I do now.
I called Double data again so it's called Double data.
And what are we passing into it this time.
Point well what's the value of it pointer 1000.
So we're calling this with a thousand which is the address of some integer.
So we activate that on that activation record and it's got that same local variable right and pointer
that's this guy right up here and recopying a thousand in there as the pointer same as we had before.
So what do we do now we execute this code.
It now changes is 20 to 40 OK.
When the function is done we clean up our stack.
We pop that activation record off the stack.
So this pointer is gone.
And then we come right back to Main and we say I put the value of the values now 40.
OK so there you go.
This is how pass by reference with pointers works is really pretty straightforward.
Let's execute this code now and you'll see the result is.
Now slide this over just a little bit you can see value here was 10.
Then we doubled it to 20 then we called it again and doubled it again to 40 or perfect.
So let's take a look at another example now.
OK so here's another example.
I'm in the same workspace section 12.
Now I'm in the passing pointers to project and what I've done here is I've written a swap function that
basically swaps two variables to weightage variables in this case and here's my main that exercises
at.
So let's let's try this out.
Here's my main as usual.
Here's the stack.
Main has two local variables.
It's got X and it's got y x is initialized to 100 and Y is initialized to 200.
Let's assume that these are at addresses 1000 and 2000.
So we've got some nice easy numbers to work with.
OK.
So right here we're up putting what's x.
We're putting a new line in front of x but that's OK what's x.
Well X is 100.
So we're going to display 100 here and now we're going to say well what's why we're going to output
the value of Y which is 200.
Pretty easy.
Now main stops what it's doing.
And we transfer control over to swap.
So we're going to call swap
and you notice swamp has three local variables it's got an A it's got a B and it's got a temp.
So we need to allocate storage for all of those on the activation record on the on the stack.
Right.
So we've got a we've got B and we've got temp.
In this case a are both pointers to integers and templates just a regular integer.
So we're going to call swap with the address of X and the address of y the address of x is a thousand
and the address of y is 2000.
So that's what the call looks like.
Now this X right here gets mapped to that parameter.
So that's what we're doing.
We're copying that value too.
So it's not going to be what X is right here.
Right.
I am going to get a thousand and B will get 2000.
So here are your pointers.
B is pointing right here and a is pointing right there.
Yes and let's start executing this code temp.
We're assigning what points to to temp but what is a point till we know points to an integer right.
Because this is an integer pointer.
So we're going to take the integer that points to let's follow a.
It points to 100 and we're storing it in temp temp was an integer not a pointer.
OK so that's done.
Now we're going to execute the second one which says take what B is pointing to.
Or let's follow B beast pointing to 200 hundred and put it into where AA was pointing.
OK it was pointing here.
So we're going up to 200 here.
So that's done and then we'll take the temp which was 100 right here and we're going to put it into
a where B was pointing.
So B was pointing to here.
Sort of put the 100 here.
Notice those two integers got swamped now.
So at this point the function is done.
What do we do.
We clean up the stack.
We pop off that activation record.
All this is now gone and we just clean these up as well.
And that's where we're at right now.
So we're back in May now what's X we protect the value of x is 200 and we display the value of y right
here which is 100.
Notice that we actually swap those variables.
So that's really what's going on with pass by reference with pointers in this example.
It's pretty straightforward if you remember we did this with references.
References is probably what you'd want to do here but I'll talk about using references versus pointers
on the very last video in the section that gives you some insight as to what to use when.
But there you go this is how you do it with pointers.
Let's look at another example now.
OK so I've switched over to the passing pointers three project in the section 12 workspace.
In this case we're going to pass a pointer to a vector rather than using integers as we've done in the
past.
And this couple of examples in this main and I'll leave the second example here that's commented out
for after I showed you this one.
So this is what I've got.
I've got a real simple function here called display and it expects a pointer to a vector of strings
so expects the address of some vector that hold strings.
We can all it's doing is just looping through the vector and printing out all the strings in it.
I'm not going to draw the stack out now.
I think this is going to be pretty easy to follow and I'd have gone over all those examples.
So in this case I've got a vector of string objects.
It's called Stooges.
And here's the three stooges Larry Moe and Curly.
So what have I got.
I've basically got a vector object and it's got three strings.
Larry Moe and Curly.
It's called Stooges.
And it exists at location a thousand on the stack there in the main Mayne's activation record.
Then I'm just calling stooges here I'm calling display and I'm passing in the address of stooges.
Perfect.
So now once I'm here in this display function that you see here on 7 once I'm here all I want to do
is display all those strings that are in the vector.
So I'm going to use a range base for loop that just iterates through the vector imprints of the strings.
Well I have a pointer Here's my VI right and V has a thousand in it.
So this is v right here it's pointing not the vector again but just a simple pointer.
So in order to get to what the pointer is pointing to dereference the pointer.
That's what I need to do.
So if I dereferences v I've got this Stooges vector right here right.
And that's what's going on right there.
So for Auto which is a string right.
So for every string in the collection while the collection is not v these the pointer to the collection.
So if I dereference V I get to collection and this executes just like you would expect OK.
Now let me clear this out and I'll run it real quick so that we can test this.
And there you see Larry Moe and Curly being displayed by this function right here.
Now in this case we really don't want this display function to modify stuff right.
I mean it's only displaying vector elements.
We don't want to modifying anything so we could get this to modify something.
That's not what we want to do but we certainly could do remember that we could do the at method of the
vector class where we could simply do star v.
Right dereferenced this pointer.
That gives to the vector then I could say dot at zero equals funny.
And what that will do is it'll change the first vector element Larry.
Too funny.
Notice the syntax the syntax may be a little strange but think about this this is very logical right.
If I dereference the pointer I get the vector and then once I have the vector I can do at that size
whatever else I need on it.
So this sets that to funny.
I could also come over here and do something like vi which is the pointer right is no pointer.
So now I'm not pointing anywhere.
So if I do both of these you can see that this will compile just fine and run.
Now if I move this to the top right there.
Now I'm actually going to change that vector element so when I run it you'll see funny now instead of
Larry you see that right there.
So this is not something you want to happen.
Right.
So display function is should be messing around with the vector that you're pointing to.
So in this case we could use the conc qualifier here.
Right.
That will prevent this from happening right there so if I do this now I'll get a compiler error right
there you can see the red arrows saying hey you're telling me that that vext that vector I'm pointing
to is constant you can't mess with it.
You just tried to mess with it so that it won't be allowed.
And if I put a concert here then this line 13 won't be allowed.
I'll try to compile that.
And there's the error because now you're telling me that the pointer is constant.
You just tried to change it here.
OK so again that's not what you want to do here.
All right so now it's a lot safer.
This function we can't change the vector and we can't change the pointer either.
So let's look at one last quick example and I'll clear this out.
And what we've got now is let me close this up.
We've got another function called display because we're using the function overloading here remember
we can use the same name for for two different functions.
And I mean come at this piece out you know uncomment this piece right here.
OK.
So in this case I have an array of scores right which is an array of integers and I've set them all
to these scores and I've got a negative one at the end.
In this case the negative one is a sentinel.
This is where I want to stop processing.
So what I'm doing in this display function here is I'm passing in the address of that first integer
and the Sentinel.
We don't want to stop and you can see what this is doing.
Saying While what I'm pointing to right there is not equal to the Sentinel which in this case is minus
1 then process what I'm doing right.
So I'm going to basically dereference that array display 100 and then increment the read the pointer
to the next element.
So think about what's going on here.
Here's the array.
And let's just put a few numbers in here.
One hundred 98 97 79 85 and minus one I might have missed one but that's OK.
So at this point that's my scores.
This is scores.
This is the same address 1000.
Perfect.
So I'm passing in scores.
So now my array variable in the function points right there and my centinel is minus 1.
All right so am I pointing to negative 1.
No I'm not I'm pointing to a hundred.
All right.
Print out 100 and increment the pointer.
Who were the pointer pointing to.
Well now the point is going to point here not here.
So now we're going to loop again a printout of 98 and we're going to keep doing that until we hit minus
1.
So this is going to print 98 97 79 85 and then it's going to stop.
In this case we could pass in constant for the array right.
We're pointing to these numbers.
We don't want to change it but we are actually updating the pointer here.
So we can't have a constant pointer right.
We can have constant a pointer concept integers but not a constant pointers because we're actually changing
the pointer.
This is something in this example here that you can't do with references.
You've really got to use pointers to do this kind of stuff.
OK.
So that wraps up this video.
And there you see a couple of different examples of pass by value with pointers.
At this point you might be thinking do I use pointers do I use references.
How do I do this.
Stay tuned.
And the last video on this section I'll tell you exactly when you should use pointers and when you should
use references.